Imagine living in a world
without any Bible
—no knowledge of Jehovah or Jesus Christ,
no Jehovah’s Witnesses,
no understanding of why we’re here
or where we’re going.
How would you feel?
It’s just like the apostle Paul told
the Ephesians when he said:
“You had no hope
and [you] were without God in the world.”
One Bethelite told me
that when he reads these words,
it sends a chill through him.
It makes him feel stone cold.
Well, we can be thankful
that we don’t live in a world
where Jehovah is unknown.
We don’t live in that world,
but billions of people do.
I’d like to invite you
to turn your Bibles, please,
to Isaiah chapter 60.
And what we’re going to see
is that the Bible does foretell a time
when the world would be in darkness.
Isaiah 60,
and we’re going to start with verse 1:
“Arise, O woman,
“shed light, for your light has come.
“The glory of Jehovah shines on you.
“For look! darkness will cover the earth
“and thick gloom the nations;
“but on you Jehovah will shine,
“and on you his glory will be seen.
“Nations will go to your light
and kings to your shining splendor.”
So how did the world
come to be filled with so much darkness?
We know that from the beginning,
Satan tried to snuff out worship of Jehovah.
And he probably figured
that if the world was going to be dark,
he could keep it that way
by destroying either Jehovah’s people
or Jehovah’s Word
or preferably both.
But Jehovah has shown
that he’s in full control of matters.
It says here in these verses
that he would raise up his “woman”
and that “nations [would] go
to [this] light.”
And when we think of nations,
we think of various countries,
cultures, customs,
and languages.
And it only stands to reason
that in order for these nations
to be attracted to this light,
they would need to understand the message.
It would need to be made available to them
in their language.
Now, Jehovah has shown
that it’s easy for him to do this.
He can bring the message to people
in their own language.
And we’re going to look at an example.
This is in Acts 2,
and we’re going to look at the account here
of some of the things
that took place at Pentecost
—Acts 2.
And we’re going to start reading
with verse 3:
“And tongues as if of fire
became visible to them
“and were distributed,
“and one came to rest on each one of them,
“and they all became filled with holy spirit
“and started to speak in different languages,
“just as the spirit enabled them to speak.
“At that time devout Jews
from every nation under heaven
“were staying in Jerusalem.
“So when this sound occurred,
“a crowd gathered and was bewildered,
“because each one heard them speaking
in his own language.
“Indeed, they were utterly amazed and said:
“‘See here, all these who are speaking
are Galileans, are they not?
“‘How is it, then, that each one of us
is hearing his own native language?’”
And then down to verse 11:
“‘We hear them speaking in our languages
“about the magnificent things of God.’
“Yes, they were all
“astonished and perplexed,
saying to one another:
‘What does this mean?’”
Well, we know that what happened here
is in contrast to what Jehovah did
at the Tower of Babel,
because there, people were banding together
in rebellion against him,
and he did something about it
to stop that rebellion.
He erased the knowledge of the language
that they knew before
and gave them a new language.
But here in this case at Pentecost,
it seems that Jehovah did not erase
the language that they knew before;
he just gave them a new one.
But what was Jehovah’s purpose here?
Why did Jehovah choose this miracle
when he had gathered all of these devout Jews
together in Jerusalem?
You see, these devout Jews
probably knew Greek
and attended the synagogue.
They knew the lessons of the Messiah,
but these scriptures tell us
they were bewildered,
“utterly amazed,” “astonished,”
“perplexed” at what they were hearing.
This word “astonished” in verse 12
is the same Greek word
that is used in Luke (the 8th chapter)
when Jairus’ twelve-year-old daughter
was resurrected.
And verse 56 tells us
that “her parents were beside themselves.”
It’s a very strong word.
But why did these people
have such a strong reaction?
Let’s look back at verse 8:
“How is it, then, that each one of us
is hearing his own native language?”
And we’re going to take a look
at the footnote, and it says:
“Or ‘the language of his birth.’”
So, you see, this wasn’t
the language of education for them.
This was the language of the womb.
This is the language
that their moms spoke to them in.
And we know that scientists tell us
that language development starts in the womb
and that newborns just a couple of days old
are already crying
in the rhythm of the language
that they’ve been hearing
for the last three months
in their mother’s womb.
So it’s interesting
that Jehovah chose the language
that they started learning in the womb.
This made a very deep impact on them.
You see, Jehovah did this;
he wanted to make this deep emotional impact
so they would go back home
to “every nation under heaven”
and never ever in their lifetime
forget what they saw and heard
there at Pentecost.
And they would spread
the good news about this
to all of the people where they went.
What we learn from this
is that Jehovah has power over language.
He had used it before,
and he would use it again.
Now, we said before that one of Satan’s goals
would be to try to destroy Jehovah’s people.
So we’re going to take a look at some events
that show examples of this.
I’d like to invite you, please,
to turn to the back of your Bibles
to Appendix B9.
And you’ll see some maps there,
and please look
at the upper right-hand corner of the page.
And you’re going to see
that the gray, shaded area
is the vast Medo-Persian Empire.
Now, while you’re looking at that map,
I want to just read
the first two verses of Esther:
“Now in the days of Ahasuerus,
“that is, the Ahasuerus
“who ruled over 127 provinces
“from India to Ethiopia
“[So you see that there on your map
“[on the lower right-hand corner
“[of that gray, shaded area.
“[You see that the Medo-Persian Empire
“[goes all the way down into India
“[and in the lower left,
“[the southwest corner,
“all the way down into Ethiopia],
“in those days
“when King Ahasuerus was sitting
on his royal throne in Shushan the citadel,”
and you see that right just about
in the middle of the map.
So this creates the setting
for these verses that we’re going to read.
I’d like to invite you
to turn your Bibles now
to Esther the third chapter,
and we’re going to start reading at verse 6.
We know the story of Esther.
Mordecai refused to bow down to Haman.
And Haman was furious.
So let’s start reading in verse 6:
“But he [Haman]
“despised the thought
of doing away with Mordecai alone,
“for they had told him
about Mordecai’s people.
“So Haman began seeking to annihilate
“all the Jews
who were in the entire realm of Ahasuerus,
all of Mordecai’s people.”
And then verse 8:
“Haman then said to King Ahasuerus:
“‘There is a certain people
“‘scattered and dispersed among the peoples
in all the provinces of your realm,
“‘whose laws are different
from those of all other peoples;
“‘and they do not obey the king’s laws,
“‘and it is not in the king’s interests
to let them be.
“‘If it pleases the king,
let a decree be written
“‘that they be destroyed.
“‘I will pay 10,000 silver talents
to the officials
to put into the royal treasury.’”
We can see that his lies and deception
misled the king
because he said “a certain people.”
He didn’t say who.
“They do not obey the king’s laws.”
This was a lie.
And then he said
that “they [should] be destroyed.”
Well, in verse 11, King Ahasuerus said:
“Do with them as you see fit.”
Let’s continue our reading in verse 12:
“The king’s secretaries were then called
“on the 13th day of the first month.
“They put in writing all of Haman’s orders
to the king’s satraps,
“the governors who were over the provinces,
“and the princes of the different peoples,
“to each province in its own script
“and to each people in its own language.
“[They wanted to get the word out.]
“It was written
in the name of King Ahasuerus
“and sealed with the king’s signet ring.
“The letters were sent by means of couriers
to all the king’s provinces,
“giving the order to annihilate,
“to kill, and to destroy all the Jews,
“young and old alike, children and women,
“on a single day,
on the 13th day of the 12th month,
“that is, the month of Adar,
and to seize their possessions.”
So you see, this message “Kill the Jews!”
went viral,
and it meant death
for all of Jehovah’s servants.
Their goal was complete annihilation.
Now, we’ve learned
that Haman was a descendant of Agag.
And he was likely seeking revenge
because Jehovah had decreed
the eventual extermination of the Amalekites,
and Agag was one of them.
Now, what we read here in the book of Esther
reminds us of what we read
in the book God’s Kingdom Rules,
and there’s a nice account on page 93
from our Brother Zacharie Elegbe.
And he talks about the ban
against Jehovah’s Witnesses in Benin.
And this is what he says:
“In 1976,
“when we had 2,300 publishers,
“our work was banned
“and the government ordered
the ban to be broadcast
“in every local language.
“That was unheard of.
“Though Benin’s population
speaks more than 60 languages,
“radio programs back then
were usually broadcast
in only five.”
So you see, in both cases here,
they feared the spread of Jehovah’s people.
And to ensure success, they felt like
they had to get the message out
to everyone in their language.
But did it work?
Notice what our brother continues to relate:
“‘When the ban was broadcast
“‘in all  local languages,
“‘many thousands of people
living in remote areas
“‘heard of us for the very first time.
“‘They wondered,
“‘“Who are Jehovah’s Witnesses,
and why are they banned?”
“‘Later, when we reached those areas,
“many accepted the truth in short order.’
“Today, there are more than 11,500 Witnesses
in Benin.”
So you see, their plan backfired.
Their intent was to stop God’s people,
but it ended up helping our brothers
spread the good news.
This is not what they intended.
Now let’s go back to the book of Esther,
and we’re going to start again
in chapter 8.
We know that Esther risked her life
to approach the king.
She exposed Haman’s plot to kill the Jews.
Haman was killed.
He was hanged on a stake.
But since the king’s decree
could not be revoked,
he allowed a new command to be written
that would cancel out the documents
that Haman sent,
the first ones that went out.
What did these new documents say?
Let’s start reading in Esther 8:11:
“In these documents
the king granted permission
“to the Jews in all the different cities
“to gather together and defend their lives
“and to annihilate, kill, and destroy
“any forces of any people or province
that might attack them,
“including women and children,
and to seize their possessions.”
And the scriptures tell us
that “the Jews defeated
“[all of] those who hated them. . . .
Not a man could stand against them.”
They also killed the ten sons of Haman
and 75,000 others who hated them.
But notice who this second order was sent to.
Let’s go to verse 9:
“So the secretaries of the king
were summoned
“at that time in the third month,
“that is, the month of Sivan,
“on the 23rd day,
“and they wrote all that Mordecai commanded
to the Jews,
“as well as to the satraps, the governors,
and the princes of the provinces
“from India to Ethiopia,
“127 provinces,
“to each province in its own script
“[or as the footnote says,
in their own “style of writing”]
“and to each people in its own language
and to the Jews
in their own script and language.”
Now, what do we think of
when we think of this word “script”?
You see the picture here.
We have symbols and characters
that are recognizable to us
(our alphabet in English),
and it’s basically the same
in Spanish, French,
and Western European languages.
Some have accents and extra dots.
But, basically, all of these are considered
the Roman script.
And then, of course, there are others,
such as Cyrillic
(that’s used by Russia
and the former Soviet Republics),
Korean, Chinese.
There are main language families—Arabic.
So it appears
that this decree in the book of Esther
was translated into scores of languages
and many different scripts,
because they recognized that for everyone
to comprehend the message
and to act on it,
it had to be made available to them
in their language.
You see, it meant life for the Jews
and the survival of the whole Jewish race.
Just think about what the result
would have been
had this satanic plot been successful.
We know that the events in the book of Esther
concluded by about the year 475 B.C.E.
So just imagine if at that point
all of Jehovah’s servants had been killed.
That means that after that:
no Jewish race,
no walls of Jerusalem rebuilt in 455 B.C.E.,
no book of Malachi written,
no Greek Scriptures recorded,
no seed of Abraham,
no Messiah.
Where would we be?
This second message of life that went out
had to supersede that first message of death
that went out.
It couldn’t get to one person less.
Just imagine if you were
one of the condemned ones
and you were living
in the mountains of Tajikistan.
How important would it be to you
that everyone in your town
actually understood the message?
What we want to get from this is
that when it comes to saving people’s lives
and to ensure
they are going to act on the message,
it needs to come to them
in their own language and script.
And as we saw from what we read in Pentecost,
Jehovah is perfectly capable
of delivering that.
Now, when it comes to this message of life,
Satan will do anything he can
to block it, to destroy it.
Let’s look at some examples of this.
Please turn your Bibles
to Jeremiah 36.
And we know that Jehovah told Jeremiah
to write in a scroll
a message of warning to the people
that Jerusalem was going to be destroyed
unless they changed their ways.
Now, this message in the scroll
was later read to King Jehoiakim.
And Jehoiakim didn’t like what he heard.
So he cut the scroll into pieces,
and he threw them into the fire.
Well, was that the end of Jehovah’s word?
Let’s start reading
at Jeremiah 36:28,
where Jehovah told Jeremiah:
“Take another scroll
“and write on it all the same words
that were on the first scroll,
which King Jehoiakim of Judah burned up.”
And then down to verse 32:
“Jeremiah then took another scroll
“and gave it to Baruch the son of Neriah,
the secretary,
“and at Jeremiah’s dictation
he wrote on it all the words of the scroll
“that King Jehoiakim of Judah
had burned in the fire.
And many more words like those were added.”
So we see that it turned out exactly
as Jehovah foretold.
About 17 years later,
Jerusalem was destroyed,
many of the rulers were killed,
the people were taken as exiles into Babylon.
But the message that was in that scroll
that Jehoiakim threw into the fire
as well as all the circumstances
surrounding that event
were recorded here in the book of Jeremiah
and are preserved till our day.
Now we’re going to look at another example,
and I’d like to invite you
to turn to the back of your Bible again.
And we’re going to look at Appendix A3.
Now, we know
that centuries after Jeremiah’s time,
Jesus came as “the light of the world.”
But he did say
that an ‘enemy would plant weeds
among the wheat.’
And that enemy is the Devil.
Paul also spoke about the apostasy.
So we’re going to read something here.
Looking at Appendix A3, you’ll see
in the middle of the page a subheading,
“Copyists Preserve God’s Word.”
And then count to the third paragraph,
the one that begins with
“What about the 27 books . . . ?”
And then in the middle of the paragraph
is Colossians 4:16;
we’re going to start reading
right after that:
“Despite attempts
“by Roman Emperor Diocletian and others
“to destroy all . . . Christian literature,
“thousands of ancient fragments
and manuscripts
have been preserved until our day.”
Well, who was this Roman Emperor Diocletian?
Well, he’s someone who started
a vicious persecution against Christians
in the year 303 C.E.,
and it lasted for about eight years.
It was his goal to eradicate Christians.
And one of the first things he did
was that he decreed
that all the copies of their Scriptures
be destroyed
because he took it for granted
that every Christian community,
wherever they were,
had a collection of holy books
that were vital for their survival.
So his men hunted high and low
for these books,
and they burned them publicly
in the marketplaces.
The persecution was intense and barbaric,
and many Christians were maimed and killed.
It was a very difficult time
—so difficult that this time period
that ended in 311 C.E.
is called, even by secular historians,
the “great persecution.”
Now, it’s actually
what happened right after this
that catapulted Christianity into darkness.
You see, in 312 C.E.,
Constantine marched on Rome,
and he eventually became the emperor.
One of the first things that he did
was that he officially ended the persecution,
and he gave back
the property to the Christians,
and he gave them special privileges.
Now, you can just imagine
this was a sweet victory for Christians.
They welcomed Constantine with open arms.
Constantine surrounded himself
with Christians,
and he called them “brothers.”
He wanted to unify
all the people in his realm
under one universal religion.
He even wrote a letter to everyone
saying that they
should all become Christians.
And so we know
that pagan customs and celebrations
were given Christian names.
And Christian elders were given the clothing,
the status, the salary,
and the prestige of the pagan priests.
Now, not all of the Christians,
but very many of them,
welcomed Constantine.
They embraced his intervention,
and they even praised him and said,
“You are an angel sent from God
for our protection.”
Now, these Christians also embraced
the masses of unconverted pagans
who flooded into Christianity.
You see, they called themselves “Christians,”
but they were not
genuine disciples of Jesus Christ.
These Christians considered Constantine
a Christian, but he wasn’t one.
He was still officially
the high priest of Roman paganism,
but he took it upon himself
to appoint and remove church leaders.
And in the year 325 C.E.,
when there was a big dispute
about whether God and Jesus
are the same person,
they held this council at Nicaea,
and in came the Christians
—some of them maimed and scarred
from all those years of persecution.
And it was actually Constantine
who proposed the wording and said,
“God and Jesus
are of the same substance.”
And when he said that,
many of them were just gasping.
They said, “Inspired!”
They fell for it.
And this is what laid the foundation
for the Trinity doctrine,
which came a few years later.
Now, you see, it wasn’t the force
of Diocletian and the “great persecution”
that was so effective.
He couldn’t conquer the Christians,
but it was the embrace of the world
that made them fall.
One writer
likened it to a great judo throw.
He said: “You see, in judo,
“you don’t have to be bigger or stronger
than your opponent;
“you just have to push,
“and he pushes back.
“And when he pushes,
you pull and you flip him.
“And it’s his weight and his strength
that sends him,
and it’s amazing how far he will go.”
Well, Diocletian pushed on the church,
Constantine did the pull and the throw,
and the church crashed to the ground
so that a century later,
it wasn’t even recognizable
as the Christianity that we know,
because by then,
Christians were characterized
by their violence, their bloodshed,
their political intrigue and envy.
The apostasy was truly entrenched.
And this darkness was so great
that this control by Rome and the church
came to be known as the Dark Ages.
And so we know what happened after that.
For centuries the Inquisition, the Crusades
—these Christians who were persecuted
became the persecutors.
So how bad is it when even the world
calls the influence of the church “darkness”?
Remember that Isaiah 60:2 said
that “darkness [would] cover the earth.”
Now, another way to restrict the Bible
would be to limit it
to just one or two languages.
And we know that’s exactly
what this church did.
For centuries, they forbid church services
in any other language besides Latin
and forbid Bible translation.
And if you had a Bible,
you could be sent to prison for life
or burned at the stake for doing so.
And this routine continued for centuries,
because well into the 1900’s,
Catholic priests
were still confiscating Bibles
and burning them.
But we know that all of these attacks failed.
And the reason why they were
just as successful as King Jehoiakim was
when he tried to destroy Jehovah’s Word
is because the Bible tells us at Isaiah 40:8:
“The word of our God endures forever.”
And we know that it’s only
because of Jehovah’s intervention,
because from the very, very beginning
when the very first scrolls were written,
Jehovah commanded that copies be made.
And professionals
—skilled scribes and copyists—
made these copies.
And these early scrolls
were translated into other languages.
For example, in the first century,
the apostles used
the Greek Septuagint Bible.
But we also know that Jehovah protected
the integrity of the message itself.
And we know this
because we can look at manuscripts
that are just a few hundred years old,
and we can compare them
with oldest known manuscripts
—the Dead Sea Scrolls,
some of which are more than 2,000 years old.
When we compare them, we see
that there is no difference in meaning
between them.
The differences in wording
are very, very minor.
And that gives us confidence
that the contents of the Bible
have not changed from the very beginning.
What’s interesting is that these scrolls,
the Dead Sea Scrolls,
were right there in a cave in plain sight
in the land of Israel
for hundreds and hundreds of years.
All the way until 1947,
they weren’t discovered.
So why were they not discovered
during all those years
of hunting down and destroying
Jehovah’s Word?
Obviously, his protection is evident.
And it was Jehovah who would ensure
that the Bible would go on to become
the most widely translated
and most widely distributed document
in history,
because parts of the Bible exist
in nearly 2,700 languages.
We can see
Jehovah has been victorious in this.
And we know it’s the Bible that is the key
to help people to learn about God
—to learn to love him, to serve him,
to learn about the blessings
of living forever in his Kingdom
—and the Kingdom good news.
And this is what Jesus said
would be “preached in all the inhabited earth
“for a witness to all the nations,
and then the end [would] come.”
But the Bible also tells us
that as we get closer to the end,
life will be very, very difficult.
People would be “lovers of themselves,
. . . blasphemers,
“disobedient . . . ,
without love of goodness,
. . . lovers of pleasures
rather than lovers of God.”
So how would the King be able to raise up
an army of preachers during these last days
who would be willing to preach the good news?
Jehovah tells us what his plan was.
Let’s turn, please,
to Malachi the 3rd chapter
—Malachi 3:1.
This is Jehovah speaking: “‘Look!
“‘I am sending my messenger
“‘[his anointed ones],
“‘and he will clear up a way before me.
“‘And suddenly the true Lord [Jehovah],
“‘whom you are seeking,
will come to his temple;
“‘and the messenger of the covenant
[Jesus Christ] will come,
“‘in whom you take delight.
“‘Look!
He will certainly come,’
says Jehovah of armies.”
So this is telling us that his messenger
would be on the scene
well before Christ’s presence,
clearing up the way.
And it’s history that tells us,
that shows us,
that it was just one small group
of faithful ones active at that time
who stood out
as the one and only genuine Christians
who had the privilege of shaking off
the legacy that was handed to them,
the layers and layers of false teachings
associated with the Bible.
In the beginning, they were so few
and things were not clear.
But Jehovah
strengthened them organizationally,
he cleansed them spiritually,
and he equipped them to preach the good news
and to make genuine disciples.
Now, Jesus made it very clear
what their role would be,
as recorded at Matthew 24:45.
Jesus said that he would have
a “faithful and discreet slave”
and would appoint him “over his domestics,
to give them their food at the proper time.”
Now, this faithful slave knows
that much is at stake
—people’s lives—
because their commission is the same
as what Jesus told the apostle Paul
his commission was
when Jesus appeared to him and blinded him,
as recorded at Acts 26:17, 18.
Jesus told him: “I am sending you
“to open their eyes,
“to turn them from darkness to light
“and from the authority of Satan to God,
“so that they may receive forgiveness of sins
and an inheritance among those sanctified
by their faith in me.”
So just like in the days of Esther,
the faithful slave understands
that they have a message of life
that must be given ‘to each people
in its own language and in their own script.’
Now, was this too difficult
for Jehovah to accomplish
with this small group of Witnesses?
How could they possibly do it?
Well, it’s as Jesus said:
“With men this is impossible,
but with God all things are possible.”
And so today, what we see
is that the good news is being preached
in every nation under heaven.
And it’s being translated
into more than 700 languages.
And in the eyes of the world,
what is being accomplished
by Jehovah’s organization
is an impossibility.
And sometimes, maybe even we feel
that it’s an impossibility.
We may be overwhelmed
by all that’s being produced
and the results that are being had.
But what is Jehovah’s view on this?
Let’s turn our Bibles, please,
to Zechariah 8,
Zechariah 8,
and we’re going to read
starting with verse 6:
“This is what Jehovah of armies says,
“‘Although it may seem too difficult
“‘to the remaining ones of this people
in those days,
“should it seem too difficult also to me?’
“declares Jehovah of armies.
“This is what Jehovah of armies says,
“‘Here I am saving my people
“‘from the lands of the east and the west.
“‘[or as the footnote says,
“from the land of the sunrise
“‘and the land of the setting sun”]
“‘And I will bring them in,
and they will reside in Jerusalem;
“‘and they will become my people,
and I will become their God
in truth and in righteousness.’”
And so we can say that in this year of 2015,
without hesitation,
that the good news is being preached
around the world
“from the land of the sunrise
and the land of the setting sun.”
The “faithful and discreet slave”
has done things Jehovah’s way,
and they are reaping his blessings for it.
And it is we who have the privilege
of seeing the fulfillment
of Jehovah’s purposes.
Now, as an organization
we’ve been translating
for over 130 years.
And we’ve always used the resources
that are available to us.
And I would just like to mention one briefly,
and this is the MEPS system
that was developed in the early 1980’s.
And back in those days,
it was actually impossible;
there was not a way to type
very many scripts around the world
into a computer.
You could just do some basic scripts
like Roman script and a few others.
But the Governing Body
had the foresight to understand
that we needed to create a computer system,
hardware and software,
that could bring the message of life
‘to each people in their own language
‘and in their own style of writing,
in their own script.’
And it’s still this computer program
that’s being used to this day
to help publish our literature
and to share our information on our website.
Now, it’s interesting
(this is kind of a coincidence)
that all of these languages
that you are seeing here
are ones that are spoken today
in that area that you saw
in that map earlier,
the Medo-Persian Empire.
This is not all of the languages.
It’s just a few.
But it shows that Jehovah’s Word
is reaching into every corner of the earth.
Now, though the Bible is available
in 2,700 languages,
the reality is that many of those languages
are dead languages.
They’re not spoken by people anymore.
And the Governing Body also understands
that we cannot rely on Bible societies
and the Bible translations
that are distributed by them
because there are several problems.
Their Bibles are hard to get,
they’re expensive,
and they are on a mission
to eradicate Jehovah’s name.
And so now, we have
the New World Translation  available
in 128 languages.
It’s true, the faithful slave has taken on
a tremendous work with Bible translation.
But what is more important
than making the Bible available to people?
You see, it’s so easy for us
to take it for granted
that we have a Bible in our language
because most of us here in the audience
have been given a Bible
from the time we were born.
For many of us,
it was the New World Translation.
But the reality is that for many
of our brothers and sisters around the world,
they went a very long time
without having Bibles.
And if they could get a Bible,
often it was something
that used archaic language
or they were just bad translations.
But they still needed
to read the Bible every day.
And they would see words
like “hell” and “cross.”
And they knew these were wrong,
but then they would read other things
and ask:
“I wonder if this is also wrong?
Can I really trust this?”
It’s as if they’re reading the Bible
with their foot on the brake,
not quite sure if this is
what the Bible actually says.
Well, it’s as one sister said,
“With the New World Translation,
I understand it,
and I can trust it.”
Now, how many people does it take
to get this message of life out
‘to each people in their own language
and in their own script’?
About eight million.
You see, we’re all part
of one large army of Jehovah’s servants,
and we need each other.
But this large army
is made up of more than 31,000
who are working at Bethel worldwide.
Now, this figure includes
more than 6,300 commuters
and temporary volunteers.
But the point is
that it’s a collective effort
between all of us along with Jehovah’s spirit
that makes this work possible.
And it shows that it’s his work
because there is no individual
who can take credit for it.
Now, many of you Bethelites
are setting a very good example
when it comes to reaching out
to people who speak other languages.
For example,
here in the United States branch territory,
about 2,400 of you
support congregations other than English.
For example, 161 of you
support Chinese congregations.
And there are 56 of you
who are currently enrolled
in a foreign-language class.
You are doing a wonderful work.
We know that it is not as easy
as if you were just born into that language
or if you could just pioneer
in that language.
It’s hard work to learn a language.
But no doubt your efforts
are encouraging to others,
and you contribute a lot
to the stability of the congregation
that you are supporting.
It takes a lot of work.
And we encourage you not just to be satisfied
with learning the basics of the language
but also to make it your aim
to keep making progress,
to get better and better,
so that you can really be of support
to the brothers and sisters.
It can be done.
And, really, no matter the language
of the congregation that you attend,
we can confidently say to foreigners,
“We have literature in your language.”
Just like Acts 17:27 tells us,
people should “seek God,
if they might grope for him
and . . . find him.”
And you can just imagine
somebody groping for something.
They can’t see it.
Maybe it’s dark, but they understand
that it’s something within reach,
and they’re just trying to feel for it,
just to see if they can get it.
And the Bible tells us that, yes,
people can really find God
“if they . . . grope for him.”
In fact, “he is not far off
from any one of us.”
And it’s amazing that we have so many gifts
to make this message of life accessible.
We have a freshly revised Bible translation.
We have The Watchtower
in a few simplified languages.
We have songs that touch our hearts.
We have Bible education material for babies,
for children, for teenagers.
We have audio recordings, videos,
publications in braille and in sign language,
Internet Web pages.
And most of these are available
in dozens or hundreds of languages.
We can see that Jehovah
doesn’t want to leave anybody out.
He wants to make this message of life
available to everybody
no matter what their station in life.
As an example,
this brochure has been translated
into over 600 languages.
And some could say that it’s possibly
the most widely translated
(I should say,
the second most widely translated)
document in history
next to the Bible.
Now, we are thankful to the Governing Body
that all of this spiritual food
is made available for free,
without charge.
We’re thankful to them for their courage,
especially when it comes to Bible translation
and restoring Jehovah’s name.
And we thank them
for not just being concerned
with the numbers like some religions are;
they just want to go around
and baptize people
so that they can count them up and say,
“We have a lot of members.”
But the anointed are genuinely concerned
with the quality of our faith.
And they untiringly keep encouraging us
and cheering us on
to keep our relationship with Jehovah
and to not lose our faith.
This planet is now seeing
the greatest preaching work
that’s ever been done
in the history of mankind.
His word has pierced through the darkness
and conquered all of these obstacles
that Satan has put in the way.
It’s as if—
It’s just like Isaiah 11:9 says:
“The earth will certainly be filled
with the knowledge of Jehovah
as the waters cover the sea.”
We have so many good things
to look forward to.
We know that in the Bible
Jehovah showed his power
in some spectacular ways,
for example, at Babel
or at Pentecost
or in the days of Esther and Mordecai
when he stopped a genocide in its tracks.
And Jehovah has brought
the light of truth to a dark world.
He’s preserved his Word and his people.
And so we have every reason to believe
that at the end of this system of things
the climax is going to be
even more spectacular
than anything Jehovah has ever done before.
How thankful we can be to Jehovah
for allowing us the privilege
of seeing his hand at work
during these last days!
And how thankful we are
that we do not live in a world
where Jehovah is unknown!
And how happy we can be
that the good news
is being made known to people,
“to each people
in its own language
and . . . in their own script”!